iSIM and eSIM Technologies for More Expanded IoT Device Capabilities (#4156)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/isim-and-esim-technologies-for-more-expanded-iot-device-capabilities/index.md

description: In this article, you'll learn about eSIM and iSIM technologies and their contribution to ensuring more expanded IoT capabilities. We will also have a look at what to expect of future eSIM and iSIM technologies.
author: nelly-atieno
date: 2021-10-10T00:00:00-20:22
topics: []
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/isim-and-esim-technologies-for-more-expanded-iot-device-capabilities/hero.jpg
    alt: iSIM and eSIM Technologies for More Expanded IoT Device Capabilities Hero Image
---
The Internet of Things (IoT) market is evolving rapidly; so does supporting technologies such as SIM. SIM cards play a crucial role in connecting IoT devices. 
<!--more-->
However, the limitations with physical SIM cards, such as the risk of theft, space consumption, less durability, etc., are becoming more expensive and difficult to accommodate. eSIM and iSIM technologies are an answer to physical SIM's drawbacks. 

They are flexible and less expensive drivers of the evolving connected devices. These technologies use embedded chips instead of cards to improve IoT devices' longevity, security, and reliability.

> In this article, you'll learn about eSIM and iSIM technologies and their contribution to ensuring more expanded IoT capabilities. We will also have a look at what to expect of future eSIM and iSIM technologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, you'll learn about eSIM and iSIM technologies.  And, their contribution to ensuring more expanded IoT capabilities. We will also have a look at what to expect of future eSIM and iSIM technologies.
```

### What is eSIM technology?

> The [standard sim](https://blog.dataroam.com/2013/09/09/whats-the-difference-between-a-standard-sim-micro-sim-and-nano-sim/#) has various limitations that the embedded SIM came to solve. Traditional sim cards come with technical restrictions and carrier lock-ins that restrict the use of these sims to a specific network or country. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [standard sim](https://blog.dataroam.com/2013/09/09/whats-the-difference-between-a-standard-sim-micro-sim-and-nano-sim/#) has various limitations that the embedded SIM came to solve. Traditional sim cards come with technical restrictions. They have carrier lock-ins that restrict the use of these sims to a specific network or country. 
```

> That is not the case with the eSIM. eSIM has a remote profile management technology that allows users to switch to a different cellular technology, say LTE, 3G, 2G, or a different carrier network, without physically switching out the SIM card.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is not the case with the eSIM. eSIM has a remote profile management technology that allows users to switch to a different cellular technology. Say LTE, 3G, 2G, or a different carrier network, without physically switching out the SIM card.
```

Such features on the eSIM make it possible to connect more IoT devices, particularly for global deployments. Unlike with the traditional SIMs, you do not need to buy, install or manage different SIM card SKUs for each country in which they are used.

That is partly why eSIM is a choice for many when it comes to IoT deployments. [GSMA Intelligence](https://data.gsmaintelligence.com/research/research/research-2018/iot-the-next-wave-of-connectivity-and-services) projects the total number of IoT connections to grow to 25.2 billion by 2025. 

eSIM installations are expected to grow by [nearly 80%](https://www.capacitymedia.com/articles/3828155/esim-installs-to-top-34-billion-by-2025) by this time.

### What is iSIM technology?
The integrated SIM (iSIM) is a recent advancement of eSIM technology and is expected to disrupt cellular IoT. Its major development is moving the embedded universal integrated circuit card ([eUICC](https://www.iot-now.com/2016/07/07/49682-what-is-euicc-and-why-is-it-important/)) functionality onto devices' permanent hardware.

> iSIM relies on a system-on-a-chip ([SOC](https://www.tomshardware.com/reviews/glossary-soc-system-on-chip-definition,5890.html)) architecture that allows integrating SIM functionality with existing processors and cellular modems. This is a significant technology improvement from eSIM, whose functionality relies on a separate processor and requires a share of a device's hardware footprint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
iSIM relies on a system-on-a-chip ([SOC](https://www.tomshardware.com/reviews/glossary-soc-system-on-chip-definition,5890.html)) architecture. This architecture allows integrating SIM functionality with existing processors and cellular modems. This is a significant technology improvement from eSIM. eSIM's functionality relies on a separate processor and requires a share of a device's hardware footprint.

iSIM is tiny in size, making it suited for smaller IoT hardware, including shrinking medical devices and wearables. You can take an iSIM connected device to different countries or regions and provision it to an IoT network remotely without restrictions.

### What makes an eSIM and iSIM better for the IoT?

> Businesses that use IoT systems will benefit from eSIM and iSIM. The eSIM and iSIM technology boost large-scale machine-to-machine deployments typical with power plants, warehouses, power plants, manufacturing facilities, and oil and gas plants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Businesses that use IoT systems will relish eSIM and iSIM. The eSIM and iSIM technology boost large-scale machine-to-machine deployments. For example power plants, warehouses, manufacturing facilities, and oil and gas plants.
```

> Before the introduction of eSIM and iSIM, companies working with an extensive collection of hardware requiring mobile connectivity used to install a SIM card in each unit. eSIM and iSIM have eliminated such time-consuming tasks as it allows businesses to connect all their technology to a mobile network remotely. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before the introduction of eSIM and iSIM, companies working with an extensive collection of hardware requiring mobile connectivity used to install a SIM card in each unit. eSIM and iSIM have eliminated such time-consuming tasks. This is as it allows businesses to connect all their technology to a mobile network remotely.
```

Today, if a business needs to operate a certain technology in another country, it programs that tech remotely to connect to a local operator in the target country.

> IoT devices connected through eSIM and iSIM can send data through many operator networks. They make it straightforward to shift connectivity providers when the need arises. This happens without swapping out the physical sim (like what happens with traditional SIM) or establishing new operator contracts or International Mobile Subscriber Identity ([IMSI](https://www.emnify.com/en/resources/imsi)). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IoT devices connected through eSIM and iSIM can send data through many operator networks. They make it straightforward to shift connectivity providers when the need arises. This happens without swapping out the physical sim (like what happens with traditional SIM). Or, establishing new operator contracts or International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI).
```

> Some reasons that may drive IoT service providers to shift connectivity include the search for new networks with improved coverage and better pricing for connectivity or geographic location change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some reasons that may drive IoT service providers to shift connectivity include:
1. The search for new networks with improved coverage. 
2. Better pricing for connectivity or geographic location change.
```

eSIM and iSIM are a boost to industrial IoT's efforts to increase the usage of wireless and mobile sensors and connected devices. Since wireless sensors do not need wire connectivity to connect devices, they are used in more challenging locations for monitoring and managing plants. 

Everything is done over the air, energy efficiently, wirelessly, and seamlessly. These wireless devices have a better battery performance compared to wired devices. This increases energy efficiency for connected devices.

### Benefits of iSIM and eSIM technologies
#### Promotes interoperability
Before iSIM and eSIM, it required physical support logistics to maintain SIM connectivity and provision devices. But today, you can handle such tasks from a single IoT platform in no time. 

> Both iSIM and eSIM are versatile, promoting low operating costs for companies and providing the space to grow IoT investments and expand IoT ecosystems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both iSIM and eSIM are versatile, promoting low operating costs for companies.  And, providing the space to grow IoT investments and expand IoT ecosystems.
```

Connecting devices using iSIM and eSIM means you can move such devices anywhere in the world and join them on an IoT network. Such devices also allow over-the-air ([OTA](https://development.libelium.com/over-the-air-programming-guide/introduction)) programming and remote provisioning. That way, the infrastructure load on IoT deployment lightens significantly.

#### Maintains high-security levels

> Cybercrime is a common concern for IoT providers, developers, and device users. As part of an effort to address such an issue, iSIM developers implanted SIM functionality into every module component with a hardware element that provides a carrier-grade element like that of a physical SIM. 

Reviewer: Kindly shorten the long sentence in this paragraph. The second sentence is quite long.

eSIMs and iSIM are embedded into the device, so they are not separate hardware. That way, cases of SIM theft, replacement, and alteration are minimal.

#### Reduces costs
The traditional SIM requires IoT original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to use extra sockets, circuity, and components that are unnecessary in manufacturing eSIMs and iSIM. For example, iSIM connectivity is integrated directly into the chipset, so few components are used. The cost of acquiring such a SIM reduces without impacting the reliability.

Users of eSIMs and iSIM can provision to a wide range of cellular networks without physically replacing or purchasing a new SIM. The logistical management of cards becomes easy, especially for large consumers of IoT devices.

### The future of eSIM and iSIM
eSIMs and iSIM technologies are promising improvements in the scalability, design, and security of IoT solutions. While the potential of eSIMs and iSIM is yet to be fully realized, cases of successful use of these technologies are increasing daily. 

> eSIMs and iSIM are likely to drive innovations among IoT devices. The IoT landscape is evolving rapidly, and eSIMs and iSIM are built with flexible provisioning to ensure devices accommodate future network changes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eSIMs and iSIM are likely to drive innovations among IoT devices. The IoT landscape is evolving rapidly. And, eSIMs and iSIM are built with flexible provisioning to ensure devices accommodate future network changes.
```

While traditional cellular carriers focus on building eSIMs and iSIM infrastructure, the end-users expect Mobile Virtual Network Operators ([MVNOs](https://www.whistleout.com/CellPhones/Guides/What-is-a-MVNO)) to provide affordable and more flexible IoT networking solutions.

> iSIM improves on the eSIM technology and solves some of eSIM's limitations. This is expected to continue with iSIM technology developments, such as combining the device's SIM card and processor into one component. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
iSIM improves on the eSIM technology and solves some of eSIM's limitations. This is expected to continue with iSIM technology developments. Such as combining the device's SIM card and processor into one component.
```

This cloud-free up some space for accommodating larger batteries, more RAM capacity, and thinner phones.

### Conclusion
The traditional SIM restricts cellular IoT users to a single region or carrier. eSIMs and iSIM removed such restrictions to allow users to provision their SIM to any network and move devices across the globe. 

> Users now have the option of choosing iSIMs, eSIMs, and traditional SIM according to the connectivity strategy that meets their IoT deployment needs. A new IoT world with an increasingly-connected people is a possible reality with iSIM and eSIMs technologies' continued support to a growing market for IoT devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users now have the option of choosing between iSIMs, eSIMs, and traditional SIM.  This decision is based on the connectivity strategy that meets their IoT deployment needs. A new IoT world with an increasingly-connected people is a possible reality.  With iSIM and eSIMs technologies' continued support to a growing market for IoT devices.
```
